Internal Solution for CSES digit queries (#2059)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/cses-2431.mdx

---
id: cses-2431
source: CSES
title: Digit Queries
author: Nathan Gong
---

## Explanation

Since $k$ can be as big as $10^{18}$, there is no way we can approach this
problem through brute force. Instead, we'll need to work out an algorithm that
can answer queries in logarithmic time.

> Let's group numbers by the amount of digits they have. An observation we can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's group numbers by how many digits they have. An observation we can
```

make is that for any $n \geq 1$, there are $9 \cdot 10^{n-1}$ numbers in the

> group with numbers of length $n$. Additionally, for each group, the amount of

Reviewer: "Amount" is wrong, so please use something "the number of" or "how many

digits from all of the group's numbers combined is $n$ times the amount of
numbers in the group. For instance:

> - Length $1$ numbers: $1$...$9$ -> $9$ numbers -> $1\cdot9=9$ digits total

Reviewer: Use \dots instead of ...

And preferably a latex right arrow

- Length $2$ numbers: $10...99$ -> $90$ numbers -> $2\cdot90=180$ digits total
- Length $3$ numbers: $100...999$ -> $900$ numbers -> $3\cdot900=2700$ digits
  total
- And so on...

> To find which group the number that contains the $k$th digit is in, we can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find which group the number that contains the $k$-th digit is in, we can
```

iterate through groups until the sum of the total number of digits from all the
groups we've processed becomes greater than or equal to $k$. In other words, we
continue increasing the number of groups we look at (starting from $1$-digit
numbers) until the following is true:

$$
\sum^{\text{\# of groups}}_{n=1}{n\cdot9\cdot10^{n-1}\geq k}
$$

> Once the condition becomes true, we know that the $k$th digit must fall into the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the condition becomes true, we know that the $k$-th digit must fall into the
```

last group used in the sum. From there, we can calculate the exact number that
the $k$th digit is in, which we can then use to find the value of the $k$th

> digit with modular arithmetic.

Reviewer: How exactly do you use modular arithmetic to do this? Also, modular arithmetic is a gold topic while this is a bronze problem, so ideally you should use something else (or explain it differently)

Author: I can add a brief explanation. This is really basic modular arithmetic (essentially just using k-1 % n to find the exact position of the number the digit is in) that I think is normal for bronze/silver.

numbers in the group. For instance:

- Length $1$ numbers: $1$...$9$ -> $9$ numbers -> $1\cdot9=9$ digits total
- Length $2$ numbers: $10...99$ -> $90$ numbers -> $2\cdot90=180$ digits total
- Length $3$ numbers: $100...999$ -> $900$ numbers -> $3\cdot900=2700$ digits
  total
- And so on...

To find which group the number that contains the $k$th digit is in, we can
iterate through groups until the sum of total the number of digits from all
groups we've processed becomes greater than or equal to $k$. In other words, we
continue increasing the number of groups we look at (starting from $1$-digit
numbers) until the following is true:

$$
\sum^{\text{\# of groups}}_{n=1}{n\cdot9\cdot10^{n-1}\geq k}
$$

Once the condition becomes true, we know that the $k$th digit must fall into the
last group used in the sum. From there, we can calculate the exact number that
the $k$th digit is in, which we can then use to find the value of the $k$th
digit using modular arithmetic.

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(q\log{k})$

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;
typedef long long ll;

int q;

> ll k;

Reviewer 2: why not just make these local

> ll pow10(int exp) {

Reviewer 2: think c++ has builtin pow
yeah here: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/math/pow

Author: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/15851636/why-is-my-integer-math-with-stdpow-giving-the-wrong-answer

Not super familiar with c++ library functions, but it works with floating point numbers and apparently can also be inaccurate

Reviewer 2: ah ok
~~add comment please~~

Author: yes sir

> static ll pow10(int exp) {

Reviewer 2: static?

Author: lol oops i'm not that great at c++

	}
	return product;
}

int main() {
	int q;
	ll k;	
	cin >> q;

	for (int i = 0; i < q; i++) {
		cin >> k;

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

		/*
		 * Subtract k by sizes of groups until k becomes smaller than the size
		 * of the current group. This produces the same effect as summing group
		 * sizes until k becomes less than or equal to the sum.
		 */
		int n = 1;
		while (k > n * 9 * pow10(n - 1)) {
			k -= n * 9 * pow10(n - 1);
			n++;
		}

		// The exact number the kth digit is in
		long num = (k - 1) / n + pow10(n - 1);
		// The location in num of the kth digit
		int loc = (int) ((k - 1) % n);
		// Determine answer by converting num to string and indexing at loc

> 		cout << to_string(num).at(loc) << endl;

Reviewer 2: think with c++ strings you can just use the [] operator

Reviewer 3: `.at()` ensures it will throw an error for out of bounds.

Author: which one is generally preferred in c++

Reviewer 2: usually just the [] operator
i mean there's literally no way it could be oob in the first place so...

Author: aight I'll keep the brackets then

Reviewer 3: i mean either is fine

	}

> 
> 	return 0;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

}
```

</CPPSection>

<JavaSection>

```java
import java.util.*;
import java.io.*;

public class DigitQueries {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		Kattio io = new Kattio();

		int q = io.nextInt();
		for (int i = 0; i < q; i++) {
			long k = io.nextLong();

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

			/*
			 * Subtract k by sizes of groups until k becomes smaller than the
			 * size of the current group. This produces the same effect as
			 * summing group sizes until k becomes less than or equal to the sum.
			 */
			int n = 1;
			while (k > n * 9 * pow10(n - 1)) {
				k -= n * 9 * pow10(n - 1);
				n++;
			}

			// The exact number the kth digit is in
			long num = (k - 1) / n + pow10(n - 1);
			// The location in num of the kth digit
			int loc = (int) ((k - 1) % n);
			// Determine answer by converting num to string and indexing at loc
			io.println(Long.toString(num).charAt(loc));
		}
		io.close();
	}

	// Returns 10 to the power of exponent

> 	static long pow10(int exponent) {

Reviewer 2: you sure `Math.pow` doesn't work?

Author: It's inaccurate for large powers so I think it's safer to manually calculate it using integer multiplication

Reviewer 2: maybe add as comment

		long product = 1;
		for (int i = 0; i < exponent; i++) {
			product *= 10;
		}
		return product;
	}

	// CodeSnip{Kattio}
}
```

</JavaSection>

<PySection>

```py
q = int(input())

> for _ in range(q):

Reviewer 2: for _ in range(int(input())):

	k = int(input())
	n = 1

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

	"""
	Subtract k by sizes of groups until k becomes smaller than the size of the
	current group. This produces the same effect as summing group sizes until
	k becomes less than or equal to the sum.
	"""
	while k > n * 9 * 10**(n - 1):

> 		k -= n * 9 * 10**(n - 1)

Reviewer 2: whitespace between ops

---
id: cses-2431
source: CSES
title: Digit Queries
author: Nathan Gong
---

## Explanation

> _Note that this is very tricky for a bronze problem!_

Reviewer 4: would this be better in a warning maybe? I'm not sure what _ does though

Reviewer 2: makes it italicized
